In this section you will learn about the four phases
of the life cycle materiel management:
planning, acquisition, operation,
use and maintenance, and divestiture.
This section should take you approximately
20 minutes to complete.
You have procured the goods that you need.
That's great!
But did you know that now you need
to manage their life cycle?
Life cycle materiel management is
the effective and efficient management of assets
from the identification of requirements
to the divestment of the assets.
Let's look a little more closely at planning, the first
phase of the life cycle materiel management.
Since planning was covered in the first three
modules of this course, here is a quick summary.
During the planning process,
managers should determine the following.
Is there a clear case to buy or to lease?
What are the administration
and operational requirements?
Is a product or its servicing necessary?
What finished goods (materiel)
or raw materials are required?
Is existing materiel available
or appropriate to meet the need?
Is it required in the quantity proposed?
How was the forecasting done
to estimate the requirement?
Is capital or operation funding
being used to support the acquisition?
Which method will be used to acquire
the materiel and related support services?
Can the requirements be satisfied with
environmentally-friendly products and products
that use resource-saving materials or processes?
Have other relevant questions,
like meeting socio-economic criteria
set by the government such as modern treaties,
land claims and the promotion of
Indigenous business, been considered?
Have accessibility considerations
been taken into account
to identify, remove and prevent new barriers?
Materiel acquisition decisions should consider the
total cost of the product over the product's life.
Once these questions have been answered,
you can proceed to the second phase
of life cycle materiel management.
After the planning phase of the life cycle,
it's time for the acquisition phase.
This is covered in
Modules 4, 5 and 6 of this course.
Here managers should acquire the materiel,
receive and inspect the goods, and ensure
quality assurance and testing is done if applicable.
Since the acquisition phase for complex or higher
valued items often requires the participation
of Public Services and Procurement Canada
and the application of additional
obligations such as trade agreements,
longer timelines are often needed
to complete the purchase.
So, plan early, and give yourself and everyone
involved enough time to acquire what you need!
In the operation, use, and maintenance phase
of the life cycle materiel management,
managers should distribute
the materiel so it can be used,
maintain records to track inventory holdings and
locations, consumption, usage, repairs, costs
and ensure that the materiel is properly used,
maintained, repaired, and safeguarded.
The objective during this phase is to get the
most out of the materiel and to make sure it lasts
as long as possible based on the best value.
In the divestment phase, managers should
identify opportunities for replacement,
reallocation or disposal of surplus materiel, or of
materiel that is no longer cost-effective to operate.
Managers should always consider alternatives
to disposing of products, such as
reallocating or refurbishing them.
Take what you have learned into real life!
Your organization will have
its own ways of doing things.
Take a time out from the course
to see how the life cycle materiel management
process works in your department.
So now that you know more about
the life cycle materiel management process,
let's see what you remember
by taking this short quiz.